update: rewrite outdated parts, add new image, add links (#3980)
JetBrains/kotlin-web-site: docs/topics/cross-platform-mobile-development.md

Web applications do not require separate bundling or distribution and can be published online. They are accessible via the browser on your computer, smartphone, and tablet, and don't need to be installed via Google Play or the App Store.

> The drawback here is that users cannot utilize all of their device’s functionality while using the app, such as contacts, calendars, the phone, and other assets, which results in a limited user experience. In terms of app performance, native apps have the lead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The drawback here is that users cannot utilize all of their device's functionality while using the app, such as contacts, calendars, the phone, and other assets, which results in a limited user experience. In terms of app performance, native apps have the lead.
```

Some experts still prefer native mobile development over multiplatform solutions, identifying the stronger performance and better user experience of native apps as some of the most important benefits.

However, many modern businesses need to reduce the time to market and the cost of per-platform development while still aiming to have a presence both on Android and iOS. This is where cross-platform development technologies like [Kotlin Multiplatform (KMP)](https://kotlinlang.org/lp/multiplatform/) can help, as David Henry and Mel Yahya, senior software engineers at Netflix, [note](https://netflixtechblog.com/netflix-android-and-ios-studio-apps-kotlin-multiplatform-d6d4d8d25d23):

> The high likelihood of unreliable network connectivity led us to lean into mobile solutions 
> for robust client side persistence and offline support. The need for fast product delivery 
> led us to experiment with a multiplatform architecture. Now we're taking this one step further 
> by using Kotlin Multiplatform to write platform-agnostic business logic once in Kotlin 
> and compiling to a Kotlin library for Android and a native Universal Framework for iOS.
>
{type="tip"}

> > [Get Started with Kotlin Multiplatform](https://www.jetbrains.com/kotlin-multiplatform/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [Get started with Kotlin Multiplatform](https://www.jetbrains.com/kotlin-multiplatform/)
```

With cross-platform programming, mobile engineers don't need to write new code for every operating system. Using a single codebase allows developers to cut down on time spent doing repetitive tasks, such as API calls, data storage, data serialization, and analytics implementation.

> Technologies like Kotlin Multiplatform allow you to implement the data, business, and presentation layers of your app just once. Alternatively, you can adopt KMP  gradually: Choose a piece of logic that changes frequently and usually goes out of sync, such as data validation, filtering, or sorting; make it cross-platform; and then connect it to your project as a microlibrary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Technologies like Kotlin Multiplatform allow you to implement the data, business, and presentation layers of your app just once. Alternatively, you can adopt KMP gradually: Choose a piece of logic that changes frequently and usually goes out of sync, such as data validation, filtering, or sorting; make it cross-platform; and then connect it to your project as a microlibrary.
```

At JetBrains, we regularly conduct Kotlin Multiplatform surveys and ask our community members about what parts of code they share between different platforms.

![Parts of code Kotlin Multiplatform users can share between platforms](survey-results-q1-q2-22.png){width=700}

#### 2. Time savings

> Due to code reusability, cross-platform applications require less code, and when it comes to coding, less code is more. Time is saved because you do not have to write as much code. Additionally, with fewer lines of code, there’s less room for bugs to emerge, resulting in less time spent testing and maintaining your code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to code reusability, cross-platform applications require less code, and when it comes to coding, less code is more. Time is saved because you do not have to write as much code. Additionally, with fewer lines of code, there's less room for bugs to emerge, resulting in less time spent testing and maintaining your code.
```

### Challenges of a cross-platform development approach

> All solutions come with their own limitations. Some in the tech community argue that cross-platform programming still struggles with glitches related to performance. Furthermore, project leads might have fears that their focus on optimizing the development process might negatively impact the app’s user experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All solutions come with their own limitations. Some in the tech community argue that cross-platform programming still struggles with glitches related to performance. Furthermore, project leads might have fears that their focus on optimizing the development process might negatively impact the app's user experience.
```

With improvements to the underlying technologies, however, cross-platform solutions are becoming increasingly [stable](https://blog.jetbrains.com/kotlin/2023/11/kotlin-multiplatform-stable/), adaptable, and flexible.

> Here are the results of two Kotlin Multiplatform user surveys regarding framework usage, conducted 6 months apart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are the results of two Kotlin Multiplatform user surveys regarding framework usage, conducted 6 months apart:
```

![Kotlin Multiplatform usage survey results](kmp-survey-results-2023.png){width=700}

> Another commonly voiced concern is that multiplatform development makes it impossible to seamlessly support the native features of platforms. With Kotlin Multiplatform, however, you can use Kotlin’s [expected and actual declarations](multiplatform-expect-actual.md) to enable your multiplatform app to access platform-specific APIs. Expected and actual declarations allow you to define in common code that you “expect” to be able to call the same function across multiple platforms and provide the “actual” implementations, which can interact with any platform-specific libraries thanks to Kotlin’s interoperability with Java and Objective-C/Swift.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another commonly voiced concern is that multiplatform development makes it impossible to seamlessly support the native features of platforms. With Kotlin Multiplatform, however, you can use Kotlin's [expected and actual declarations](multiplatform-expect-actual.md) to enable your multiplatform app to access platform-specific APIs. Expected and actual declarations allow you to define in common code that you "expect" to be able to call the same function across multiple platforms and provide the "actual" implementations, which can interact with any platform-specific libraries thanks to Kotlin's interoperability with Java and Objective-C/Swift.
```

### Kotlin Multiplatform

Kotlin Multiplatform is an open-source technology built by JetBrains that allows developers to share code across platforms while retaining the benefits of native programming. Its key benefits include:

* The ability to reuse code across Android, iOS, web, desktop, and server-side while keeping native code if needed.
* Smooth integration with existing projects. You can utilize platform-specific APIs while making the most of both native and cross-platform development.
* Full code-sharing flexibility and the ability to share both the logic and the UI, thanks to [Compose Multiplatform](https://www.jetbrains.com/lp/compose-multiplatform/), a modern declarative cross-platform UI framework built by JetBrains.
* No need to introduce a new language to your codebase when you already use Kotlin for Android. You can reuse your Kotlin code and expertise, which makes migrating to Kotlin Multiplatform less risky compared to other technologies.

> [Get started with Kotlin Multiplatform](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/kotlin-multiplatform-dev/multiplatform-getting-started.html).
>
{type="note"}

> McDonald’s, Netflix, 9GAG, VMware, Cash App, Philips, and many other companies are already capitalizing on Kotlin Multiplatform’s ability to be gradually integrated, as well as its low adoption risk. Some of them opt to enhance their app stability by sharing specific, crucial segments of their existing Kotlin code. Others aim to maximize code reuse without compromising app quality and share all application logic across mobile, desktop, web, and TV, while preserving native UIs on each platform. The benefits of this approach are apparent from the stories of the companies that have already adopted it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
McDonald's, Netflix, 9GAG, VMware, Cash App, Philips, and many other companies are already capitalizing on Kotlin Multiplatform's ability to be gradually integrated, as well as its low adoption risk. Some of them opt to enhance their app stability by sharing specific, crucial segments of their existing Kotlin code. Others aim to maximize code reuse without compromising app quality and share all application logic across mobile, desktop, web, and TV, while preserving native UIs on each platform. The benefits of this approach are apparent from the stories of the companies that have already adopted it.
```
